---
aliases: 
tags: 
draft: true
date: 2024-07-29
---
Figure 1: My daily journal.

As the sun sets after yet another long day, I retreat to my wooden desk where my journal sits. The steady radiance of my lamp casts a bright light over it. With my door closed and the windows shut tight, I am left with the stillness of a silent room, accompanied only by my pen, an opened notebook, and a warm cup of tea by my side. A stark contrast to my rambunctious day, one could hear only the faint scratch of my pen on paper and the occasional rustle of the pages turning. I could feel my heart rate slowing down as I penned down my daily reflections.

As I sat there, I could vividly recall the rigorous and demanding process of composing essays at my school desk years back. I'd start chewing the inside of my cheek, my brows furrowed. The air thickened with tension and anxiety of the task at hand as each tick of the clock gets louder in the background. I’m brought into a world of academic rigor, measuring every word used and replacing unintelligible ones with something more comprehensive to produce a rational argument. But in the sanctuary of my journal, the words can flow freely without restraint. I write because I want to and I can let my handwriting go loose, allowing the reflective process of journaling to remain unstifled.

My small, unassuming notebook also serves a different purpose: notetaking. Not just notes from lectures but books, videos, and podcasts I find online. I’d often struggle to remember what I’ve read, the thought being just out of reach on the edge of my mind. Why bother reading stacks of books and watching a whole list of videos if they keep slipping through my mental grasp? Nowadays my notebook acts as a trusty companion I carry with me everywhere I went, always there to capture fleeting thoughts and keep them safe until I could act on them.

Figure 2: Some notes that I took in my journal.

Fortunately, technology has a way of optimizing this process. One app that stood out from the rest is a note-taking tool called _Obsidian_ that I now use as my ‘knowledge vault’. It has a clean and minimal interface, the focus entirely on my own notes. Creating them has never been easier, as placing my fingers onto the keyboard is efficient and seamless.

Figure 3: My digitalised notes in _Obsidian._

I could also create links with other related notes, which generates a network of associated ideas that are easy to navigate. This is visually represented by the graph view function. As my notes grew, the graph started resembling a neural network, a web of knowledge that is an extension of my mind.

Figure 4: A local graph showing how one note (represented as nodes) is connected/related (represented as lines) to other notes.

Figure 5: A graph view of all my notes. Different colours represent different note types and subjects. Viewing it helps me see the boundaries of my thoughts and where they are approaching.

Notebooks are versatile, be it in digital or physical form. A powerful assistant to my work or studies, or a diary for self-reflection, it’s in writing that I find relief, a way to organise my thoughts and emotions more effectively, and to make them permanent. Parsing through my notes, I thus wonder: how does writing shape the way we think and feel?

In his book _Building a Second Brain_, Tiago Forte (2022) emphasises the problem of information overload. There’s an excess of information, messages, things to do and to remember. Social media also aligns us towards whatever is new and popular. But with more information available than ever before, the more we find ourselves distracted and unproductive. By researching how the most prolific thinkers in the past approached this, Forte (2022) discovers they kept with them something in common: a “commonplace book”. More than just a diary to pour out personal thoughts and reflections, a commonplace book compiles external information that speaks to us, be it quotes, recipes, and various bits of advice and wisdom. What makes these commonplace books so effective? For Forte (2022), the simple act of penning things down is a way of taking a step back, slowing ourselves down, and creating a filter that stops our attention from being fully consumed. Writing also puts us in charge. Most of our information tend to come from an outside authority, such as schools that tell us what’s important. Through personal writing however, we get to decide to keep only those we find most meaningful. Finally, Forte (2022) believes the externalising, exploring, and connecting of ideas in new and unexpected ways made possible by writing can also spark creative insights and innovations.

The growing need to better process information is clear to me given the proliferation of digital-notetaking tools today. Rather than consuming ever-increasing amounts of content, I do certainly think it is a much better use of our time to be selective in capturing and filtering out only those most meaningful to us. But to merely capture is insufficient. Writing is more of a technique for growing thoughts than harvesting them, and it is from this that new creative ideas and insights are generated as Forte (2022) suggests. I believe this to be possible in the slow and contemplative approach of writing that encourages reviewing, constant editing, and pondering on the implications of ideas overtime. Writing further drives us to look deeper at those thoughts and search for other related ideas. It compels us to reason and to give reasons, to strengthen what’s weak and reframe what’s unsound.

The slow and measured practice of writing can also “preserve our mental health” (Forte, 2022). Indeed, writing is more than just an intellectual activity. The life writer and researcher Nicoletta Demetriou (2015) in her TED talk highlights how our busy minds resemble a congested highway, with hundreds of cars passing through it daily. In the same vein as Forte (2022), writing aids in removing the extra noise, turning that busy highway into a rural street. She then explores the deeper wonders of writing by emphasising its transformative power in helping writers achieve self-discovery and personal growth, particularly by “writing without thinking”. That is, to write spontaneously and without any preconceived notions. This enables our subconscious to guide us and tap into our innermost thoughts and emotions. For some, it can offer surprising insights and help overcome creative blocks and limitations. For others however, it can be frightening. Rendering deeply rooted thoughts into words can uncover something we may not want to hear. But as Demetriou (2015) argues, this revealing process is precisely what associates writing with therapy, so much so that the term “writing therapy” has long since been a part of psychology.

When starting a new page in my journal, the first few lines are always planned. I knew what I wanted to write about, and it was satisfying to fill up half the page rather quickly. But as time went on, I realized those lines could safely be discarded. The real insights are what remained after. Forte (2022) and Demetriou (2015) both speak of writing’s effectiveness in clearing the noise. We start writing about things already in our minds, but soon we get to what we _really_ want to write about. We transition from explaining ideas and events to exploring them, arriving at something we didn’t know was there. These could be undisclosed aspects of us, as Demetriou (2015) suggests, an experience familiar to me when penning down troubling experiences. As difficult as it is, the discovery and exploration in that moment of vulnerability can be conducive to our mental health. It can be a source of calm joy, when we let go of negative emotions, gain perspective, and become self-aware by putting our thoughts on paper.

Writing is an incredibly simple task, requiring only pen and paper. Yet it surprises me to no end the numerous benefits as shared by my two sources. Writing and thinking are one and the same. As much as we may like to think of ourselves as rational, there is often a lot of jumble and senseless rumble in our minds. Writing clarifies, and it deepens. It is the process of discovery and exploration, rather than capturing and explaining. It calms us and lifts the weight off our shoulders. And by becoming better listeners to ourselves through writing, we create a habit of mind that offers to understand the deeper parts of our soul. So let us pick up a pen and start writing.
                                                                         
**References**

·         Forte, T. (2022). _Building a second brain_. Profile Trade.

·         TED. (2015). Look deeper – write – the wonders of writing | Nicoletta Demetriou [Video]. YouTube. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aTgPJQ9Dy7Q](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aTgPJQ9Dy7Q)